---
layout: page
title: CV
permalink: /cv/
---
---

###CURRENT POSITION- Institute of Biomembranes and Bioenergetics (IBBE), National Research Council (CNR), Bari, IT <br>
**Researcher and ELIXIR-ITA Training Coordinator**, 2016-Present
- University of Bologna, Master in Bioinformatics, Bologna, IT<br>**Adjunct professor**, 2016-Present 
###NATIONAL SCIENTIFIC QUALIFICATION- **Molecular Biology** (05/E2 - SSD BIO/11) - Associate Professor- **Applied Physics** (02/B3 - SSD FIS/07) - Associate Professor- **Biochemistry** (05/E1 – SSD BIO/10) - Associate Professor###EDUCATION- **Università di "Tor Vergata"**, Roma, IT <br>*PhD, Cellular and Molecular Biology*, 2003 <br>Dissertation: "Protein structural study for the optimization and analysis of sequence functional motifs" <br>Supervisor: Prof. Manuela Helmer-Citterich- **Sapienza Università**, Roma, IT <br>*Master Degree, Physics*, 1997 <br>Dissertation: "Analytical study of the Sherrington and Kirkpatrick spin-glass model" <br>Supervisor:  Prof. Giorgio Parisi- **Université Paris Diderot** – Paris 7, Paris, FR <br>*Erasmus programme*, Dept. of Mathematics, 1994-1995###ATTENDANCE TO TRAINING COURSES- **EMBL-EBI, Hinxton, UK**<br>GOBLET/ELIXIR "Metagenomics Hackathon", April 2016- **CSC, Espoo, Helsinki, FI** <br>ELIXIR-EXCELERATE workshop "Using clouds and VMs in bioinformatics training", May 2016- **University of Lausanne, Lausanne, CH** <br>Software and Data Carpentry course on "Instructor Training", January 2016- **Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, UK** <br>BioMalPar (FP6 Malaria Initiative) course on “Introduction to Plasmodium Bioinformatics”, August 2005- **Università di Bologna, Bologna, IT**** <br>4th Bologna Winter School “Hot Topics in Structural Genomics”, February 2003- **Institute for Scientific Interchange foundation, Villa Gualino, Torino, IT **<br>Euroconference on “Protein folding and structure prediction”, June 1998###RESEARCH EXPERIENCE- **Sapienza Università, Roma, IT** <br>*Research Associate (RTD)*, 2009-2015 <br>Topics: 
	- Therapeutic targets and their inhibitors, host-pathogen interactions using state-of-the art tools in computational biology. 	- Modelling of biological systems. Development of bioinformatics resources. Building pipelines.- **Sapienza Università, Department of Biochemical Sciences, Roma, IT**<br>*Postdoctoral fellow*, 2007-2009Topics:
	- Protein structure, function and disease using state-of-the art tools in computational biology	- Development of bioinformatics methodologies and resources. Building pipelines.- **Università di Bologna, Department of Experimental Biology of Evolution, Bologna, IT** <br>*Postdoctoral fellow*, 2006-2007 <br>Topics: 
	- Protein structure and function; Protein phosphorylation; Linear motifs. 	- Development of bioinformatics methodologies and resources; Neural networks. - **Università di "Tor Vergata", Department of Biology, Roma, IT **<br>*Postdoctoral fellow*, 2003-2006 <br>Topics:
	- Protein structure and function; PTM, modular domains and signalling; functional motifs. 	- Development of bioinformatics methodologies and resources.###GRANTS AND AWARDS- Sapienza Università research grant for the "Characterisation of Plasmodium falciparum antigens triggering autoimmune response", 2013- Sapienza Università research grant for the "Identification of molecular targets in malaria and schistosomiasis and characterisation of their interactions with candidate inhibitors", 2011- Telethon awards for the work in the project "Multi-centre bioinformatics project for a systematic investigation of gene expressed in human skeletal muscle", 2005 and 2002- Genes, Protein & Computer VI Conference best poster award, Chester College, Chester, 2000###ACADEMIC TEACHING AND ADVISING EXPERIENCE- **Università di Bologna**, School of Science, MD in Bioinformatics, Bologna, IT <br>*Head teaching fellow*, Module 3 (on Protein Interactions, 20h) in the Laboratory of Bioinformatics 1 course, 2015-2016 - **Sapienza Università**, MD in Engineering of Nanotechnology, Roma, IT<br>*Head teaching fellow*, "Macromolecular structures" (6 CFU), 2010-2015- **Sapienza Università**, MD in Physics of Biosystems, Roma, IT<br>*Head teaching fellow8, "Biochemistry" (6 CFU), 2011-2012
- **Università di "Tor Vergata"**, MD in Bioinformatics, Roma, IT<br>*Head teaching fellow*, "Computational methods for Biology" (6 CFU), 2005-2010- **Università di "Tor Vergata"**, MDs in Cellular and Molecular Biology, in Human Biology, and in Bioinformatics, Roma, IT<br>*Teaching assistant*, " Molecular Bioinformatics", 2003-2005- **Università di "Tor Vergata"**, B.Sc. in Cellular and Molecular Biology & B.Sc. in Human Biology, Roma, IT<br>*Teaching assistant*, "Bioinformatics", 2002-2003### TRAINING EXPERIENCE- **ELIXIR-IIB practical course**, University of Bari, Bari, Italy<br>*Organiser and instructor*, "Python for Life Scientists", 26-30 September 2016- **RDA-CODATA Research Data Science Summer School**, ICTP, Trieste, Italy<br>*Lead Instructor*, "Software Carpentry module", 01-04 Aug 2016- **ELIXIR-EXCELERATE Train the Trainer course**, IGC, Oeiras, Portugal<br>*Organiser and instructor*, 10-15 Jul 2016- **Scientific School on “Computational modeling for Life Sciences”**, Sardinian Scientific and Technological Park, Pula (CA), Italy <br>I*nvited speaker and Instructor*, 06-10 June 2016- **RNA-seq data analysis workshop**, University of Naples Federico II in collaboration with ELIXIR-IIB, Naples, Italy<br>*Invited speaker*, June 6th-10th, 2016- **ELIXIR-IIB practical course**, CNR, Napoli, Italy<br>*Organiser and instructor*, "NGS for evolutionary biologists: from basic scripting to variant calling", 2-5 May 2016- **EMBO practical course**, Budapest, Hungary<br>*Instructor*,  "Introduction to Linux command line" and " Structure and interfaces of PPIs " in the EMBO practical course on "Computational analysis of protein-protein interactions: Sequences, networks and diseases" (http://events.embo.org/16-protein-protein/), 30th May-4th Jun 2016- **ELIXIR-IIB practical course**, Università di Bologna, Bologna, IT<br>*Organiser and instructor*, "Protein networks and systems biology", 14-18 Dec 2015- **ELIXIR-IIB practical course**, CINECA Auditorium, Rome, IT<br>*Organiser and instructor*, "NGS for evolutionary biologists: from basic scripting to variant calling", 23-27 Nov 2015- **ELIXIR-IIB practical course**, CINECA Auditorium, IT<br>*Organiser and instructor*, "Gene expression profiling with HTS: RNA-Seq data analysis", 19-22 Oct 2015- **PhD School in Biology and Molecular Medicine Training course**, Sapienza Università, Rome, IT<br>*Organiser and instructor*, "Next Generation Sequencing data analysis", 5-7 Oct 2015- **EMBO practical course**, TGAC, Norwich, UK<br>*Instructor*, "Structure of PPIs and interfaces of PPIs, predicting globular 3D structure" in the EMBO Practical Course: Computational Analysis of Protein-Protein Interactions: From Sequences to Networks (http://events.embo.org/15-protein-protein/), 28th Sept- 3rd Oct 2015- **2nd level Master in Bioinformatics: Biomedical and Pharmaceutical applications**, Sapienza Università, Rome, IT<br>*Instructor*, "Programming and algorithms for Bioinformatics" (24h), 2014 and 2015- **GTPB practical course**, Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, PT<br>*Instructor*, "Bioinformatics using Python for Biologists" (40h each year), 2010-2016- **TGAC practical course**, Norwich, UK<br>*Instructor*, "Python for Life Scientists" (40h each year), 2013-2015- **Institut Pasteur practical course**, Tunis, TN<br>*Instructor*, "Proteomics and drug design" (20h), April 2012- **Università di "Tor Vergata" post-graduate training course**, Roma, IT<br>Instructor, "Bioinformatics applications" (30h), 2000###RELATED PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE- **ELIXIR-ITA Training Coordinator**<br> Coordinates the ELIXIR Italian node training activities. ELIXIR (http://www.elixir-europe.org) is a distributed sustainable European infrastructure for life science information, supporting life science research and its translation to medicine, agriculture, bioindustries and society. ELIXIR-ITA, the Italian node of ELIXIR, is a Joint Research Unit with 17 member institutions (11 Universities, CNR, CRS4, INFN, CINECA, FONDAZIONE EDMUND MACH), 2014-present - **ELIXIR-ITA Technical Coordinator for Sapienza Università**<br>Coordinates ELIXIR-ITA research support activities for - Sapienza Univeristà, Rome, 2014-present- **ELIXIR-EXCELERATE Train the Trainer subtask leader** (WP11, Training platform)<br>Coordinates the WP11 Train the Trainer subtask activities for the ELIXIR-EXCELERATE EC funded project (2015-2018)Italian representative in the ELIXIR taskforce on "Best practices in software development".- **ELIXIR's liaison to the EU Project: "EDISON, building the data science profession"**, 2016-present.- **Secretary of the Global Organisation for Bioinformatics Learning Education and Training** (GOBLET, http://www.mygoblet.org), 2012-2013.- **Chair of the Bioinformatics Training Network** (BTN, http://www.biotnet.org), 2011-2013.- **Italian representative in the "Training portal" and "e-learning and training" ELIXIR task forces**, 2014-present.Data/Software Carpentry certified Instructor (http://software-carpentry.org), since Jan 2016.- **Member of the PC for the following conferences**: ECCB (European Conference on Computational Biology); ISMB (International Conference on Intelligent Systems for Molecular Biology); BIRD (International Conference on Bioinformatics Research and Development); BIOINFORMATICS (http://www.bioinformatics.biostec.org); NETTAB (Network Tools and Applications in Biology).- **Organisation of practical courses, workshops and conferences:**	- Local organiser for the NETTAB 2016 workshop on "Reproducibility, standards and SOP in bioinformatics", CNR, Rome, IT, 100 participants, October 2016. 	- Co-organised the NETTAB 2016 satellite Goblet/ELIXIR-IIB joint tutorial on "Train the Trainer", CNR, Rome, IT, expected 20 participants, October 2016.	- Co-organised the Education & Training special session of the NETTAB 2016 Workshop, CNR, Rome, IT, October 2016.	- Co-organised the practical course on "Python for Life Scientists", University of Bari, Bari, IT, expected 24 participants, September 2016.	- Co-organised the practical course on "Exome analysis using Galaxy", University of Milano-Bicocca, Milano, IT, expected 24 participants, September 2016.	- Co-organised the 2nd ELIXIR-EXCELERATE "Train the Trainer" course, IGC, Oeiras, PT, (limited to) 8 participants, July 2016.	- Co-organised the BITS 2016 satellite workshop on "Effective academic teaching", University of Salerno, Fisciano (SA), IT, 20 participants, June 2016.	- Co-organised and co-chaired the round table on "Teaching Bioinformatics: state-of-the-art and new ideas" at the BITS 2016 conference, University of Salerno, Fisciano (SA), IT, June 2016.	- Co-organised the 1st ELIXIR-EXCELERATE "Train the Trainer" course, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK, (limited to) 10 participants, May 2016.	- Co-organised the ELIXIR-IIB practical course on "NGS for evolutionary biologists: from basic scripting to variant calling", CNR, Naples, IT, 24 participants, May 2016.	- Co-chaired the ELIXIR-EXCELERATE "Train the Trainer" framework workshop, EBI, Hinxton, UK, January 2016.	- Co-organised the ELIXIR-IIB practical course on "Protein networks and systems biology". Università di Bologna, Bologna, IT, 24 participants, December 2015.	- Co-organised the ELIXIR-IIB practical course on "NGS for evolutionary biologists: from basic scripting to variant calling". CINECA Auditorium, Rome, IT, 24 participants, November 2015.	- Organised the ELIXIR-IIB practical course on "Gene expression profiling with HTS: RNA-Seq data analysis". CINECA Auditorium, Rome, IT, 24 participants, October 2015.	- Co-organised the practical course on "Next Generation Sequencing data analysis". PhD School in Biology and Molecular Medicine (BeMM), Rome, IT, 40 participants, October 2015.	- Co-organised the practical course on "Python for Life Scientists". The Genome Analysis Centre, Norwich, UK, 25 participants, 40h, October 2013 and April 2015.	- Co-organised the workshop: "Bioinformatics Training for Life Scientists: Showcases and Challenges from Tutors' Perspectives", Basel, CH, 40 participants, September 2012.	- Local organising committee member of ECCB'08 (European Conference on Computational Biology), Cagliari, Sardinia, IT, > 400 participants, September 2008.

	###LANGUAGES**Italian**, native; **English**, fluent; **French**, fluent; **German**, basic
###SKILLS and TECHNIQUES- UNIX/Linux and Mac OSX administration- Python programming - Web programming (HTML, CGI, Django)- R scripting for statistical analyses- Pipeline building (NGS data analysis, data retrieval and filtering, etc.)- Bioinformatics tools development and testing- Relational database management systems MySQL and PostgreSQL- Molecular graphics systems: PyMOL, Chimera, SwissPDB viewer- Docking packages (e.g. Autodock)- Most of the state-of-the-art tools for bioinformatics and computational biology analyses (e.g. local Blast+, ClustalW, Modeller, etc.)- VM and Cloud computing###SELECTED INVITED TALKS- "Ten simple rules to make your teaching more effective", BITS 2016 Conference, University of Salerno, Fisciano (SA), IT, June 2016- "Role of structure-based homology modeling in biomolecular sciences", Scientific School on “Computational modeling for Life Sciences”, Sardinian Scientific and Technological Park, Pula (CA), IT, June 2016- "Computational approaches to the study of functional sites in biomolecules", Università di "Tor Vergata", Roma, IT, 2014- "A computational approach for the study of therapeutic targets and their inhibitors in human pathogens", TAGC Inserm, Aix-Marseille Université, FR, 2014- "Best practices in programming for biological data management", The Genome Analysis Centre, Norwich, UK, 2013- "GOBLET", NextGenBug  31st meeting, ARK Genomics, Roslin, Edinburgh, UK, 2013- "A structural approach to the study of therapeutical targets and their inhibitors in human pathogens", Bi-national Israel-Italy meeting, Tel Aviv University, Israel, 2012- "Cross-talking between human genome variations and their protein environment: a computational study", IRB Barcelona, SP, 2009- "Structural bioinformatics: a meeting-place for Biology and Physics", Università di Bologna, IT, 2008- "High-throughput protein functional annotation based upon local structure similarity", Genome Annotation: a BioSapiens Network of Excellence Initiative. 5th European Conference on Computational Biology (ECCB), IL, 2006- "Proteins: Structure, Function, Evolution", IUSS (Istituto Universitario di Studi Superiori), Università di Pavia, Pavia, IT, 2001- "The structure of Proteins", in the Course of "Problems in Biological Evolution"; Scuola di Genetica di Cortona, Associazione Genetica Italiana (AGI), Cortona, IT, 2001